# LL1Checker
**LL1Checker** is a tool for verifying if a grammar is LL(1) and for validating whether an input string belongs to the language generated by the grammar. The grammar is read from a file.

## 🚧 Project Status
This project is under development, but all essential functionalities are complete and have been tested with various grammars.
If you encounter any incorrect interpretations, please open an issue and provide relevant details. Contributions are welcome!

## 📋 Requirements
- Linux (currently): The dlfcn.h header is used for dynamic library loading.
- Flex: Required to generate and compile the lexer file `sudo apt install flex` in Debian based distros.
- gcc: Used for compilation within the code.
- g++ (or clangd, although untested): The Makefile is set to use g++, but can be adjusted for other compilers.

## 🛠️ Compilation
A Makefile is provided, so, run `make` to compile the project.

## ▶️ Run the Program
Once compiled, you can run the program as follows:
~~~
./parser <GRAMMAR_FILENAME>
~~~ 
- Checks if the provided grammar is LL(1). 
- If the grammar has conflicts, displays the LL(1) table with conflicts for debugging. 
~~~
./parser <GRAMMAR_FILENAME> <INPUT_FILENAME>
~~~
- Checks if the provided grammar is LL(1) and validates if the input conforms to the grammar.
- If the grammar is not LL(1), it displays the LL(1) table with conflicts.

### Optional Debug Mode
To enable additional debug information, including the full LL(1) table and the input content:
~~~
./parser <GRAMMAR_FILENAME> <INPUT_FILENAME> --debug
~~~
In `--debug` mode, the program will:
- Display the entire LL(1) table, including any conflicts if the grammar is not LL(1).
- Print the contents of `<INPUT_FILENAME>` for easy reference before parsing.

**Error Handling**: 
If `<GRAMMAR_FILENAME>` or `<INPUT_FILENAME>` do not exist or cannot be opened, the program will print an error and exit.

## 📌 Considerations
- The default end of line character is `$`. This can be changed using the instruction `set EOL char (...)`. 
- The end-of-line character can be omitted in the grammar (see grammar.txt), but it's recommended to add a first rule, such as `S -> E EOL`, where `S` is the axiom.
- For terminal symbols, note that order matters. If two regexes have common elements, place the more specific one first, as in the example:
~~~
terminal WH while;
terminal WORD [a-zA-Z][a-zA-Z]*;
~~~

## 📄 Structure of grammar.txt
The grammar file has two sections separated by `;`: **symbol definition** and **grammar definition**.

### Symbol definition
~~~
start with S;
~~~
You should write the last line to designate S as the axiom.
The terminal symbols follows the following structure: `terminal <IDENTIFIER> <REGEX>;` (like a variable!). The `<IDENTIFIER>` should adhere to the following regex pattern: `[a-zA-Z_\'][a-zA-Z_\'0-9]*`.
An example of the first section would be:
~~~
terminal a a;
start with S;
;
~~~
### Grammar definition
The grammar follows the following structure:
~~~
S -> A$;
A -> aaA;
A ->;
;
~~~
The line `A->;` represents an empty production.
So, our **grammar.txt** would be:
~~~
terminal a a;
start with S;
;
S -> A$;
A -> aaA;
A ->;
;
~~~
This grammar generates the following language: `L(G) = {aa, aaaa, aaaaaa, ...}`, that is, a language with an even number of 'a'.
And in **input.txt** file, you place the line you want to check.
